### Monte Carlo Tree Search Algorithm

There are many examples of the applications of AI in games, however, one of the most successful to note would be AlphaGo, the first computer program to defeat a Go world champion. Go is known as the most challenging classical game for artificial intelligence because of its complexity. There are 250 possible moves on each turn (played on a 19 by 19 board compared to the much smaller eight by eight chess field) and a typical game depth of 150 moves, there are about 250^150, or 10^360 possible moves in a game of Go. This is quite an exciting application of AI in games, on a strategic level, which uses a MCTS  algorithm to decide which move to play.

In a recent review MCTS is said to be a powerful approach to designing game-playing bots or solving sequential decision problems. Requiring the search of very large spaces represented by trees, it relies on intelligent tree search that balances exploration and exploitation. In such trees, nodes denote states in the game and edges denote transitions from one state to another. The MCTS algorithm is in itself a heuristic, which means that other than the rules of the game, no additional knowledge is required; however, making use of a heuristic in the MCTS approach can make it more efficient and improve its convergence. The algorithm works by performing random sampling to simulate all the possible moves that can be made going back and forth between the computer and the opposing player, calculating the payback of each move, and storing statistics to make more educated decisions in each subsequent iteration. MCTS has been improved even further with the introduction of deep reinforcement learning which is the backbone of AlphaGo.[^3]

[^3]: Maciej Świechowski Et al. “Monte Carlo Tree Search: A Review of Recent Modifications and Applications” March 2021.
