# Finite State Machines

Rather than learn how best to beat human players, Harbing Lou states that AI in games is designed to enhance human players’ gaming experience. The most common role AI is used for in games is controlling NPCs.[^4]  Often, characters in games will only have a limited set of predetermined actions. They will carry on doing the same action until some event or influence makes them change. These behaviours can be supported with the use of state machines, which consider both the world around them and their state. In a state machine, each character occupies a state which is usually associated with a specific action or behaviour. States are connected by transitions which lead from one state to another and have a set of associated conditions that must be met for a transition to take place. When a transition’s conditions are met, it is said to trigger, and when the transition is followed to a new state, it has fired.  In game AI, any state machine with this kind of structure is usually called a FSM  (Figure 2).[^5]

In a FSM, a designer predetermines all the possible states that an AI could encounter, and then programs the transitions between the states and the specific conditions associated with each transition. One of the very first games to use this concept was Pac-Man back in 1980. Each of the four ghosts was either chasing you or running away. For each state they took a semi-random route at each junction. In chase mode, each had a different chance of chasing the player or choosing a random direction. In run-away mode, they either ran away or chose a random direction.[^6]  There is an obvious drawback to the use of FSMs due to the AI’s decisions having to be pre-programmed so their behaviour often can be predictable and can cause players to lose interest. However regardless of this drawback, I found that FSM still seems to be one of the most popular techniques to use to control AI behaviours in games, which in my opinion makes sense because the algorithms are relatively easy to read/write, and they perform well in regard to memory and execution time.

Pseudo Code:[^7]
```
class StateMachine:
    # Holds a list of states for the machine
    states
    # Holds the initial state
    initialState
    # Holds the current state
    currentState = initialState
    # Checks and applies transitions, returning a list of
    # actions.
    def update():
        # Assume no transition is triggered
        triggeredTransition = None
        # Check through each transition and store the first
        # one that triggers.
        for transition in currentState.getTransitions():
            if transition.isTriggered():
                triggeredTransition = transition
                break

        # Check if we have a transition to fire
        if triggeredTransition:
            # Find the target state
            targetState = triggeredTransition.getTargetState()

            # Add the exit action of the old state, the
            # transition action and the entry for the new state.
            actions = currentState.getExitAction()
            actions += triggeredTransition.getAction()
            actions += targetState.getEntryAction()

            # Complete the transition and return the action list
            currentState = targetState
            return actions

        # Otherwise just return the current state’s actions
        else: return currentState.getAction()
```

The Algorithms I have reviewed so far in this report are the foundation for AI decision behaviours in modern day games. They both have their own merits and thrive in different situations; if you have a large data set and need to generate a large tree to denote possible states in your game, then the obvious choice is the MCTS algorithm. Whereas FSMs are flexible and being predictable also makes it easy to determine if a state can be reached.

[^4]: Harbing Lou “AI in Video Games: Toward a More Intelligent Game” BLOG, SPECIAL EDITION ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE August 2017 [AI in Video Games: Toward a More Intelligent Game - Science in the News (harvard.edu)](https://sitn.hms.harvard.edu/flash/2017/ai-video-games-toward-intelligent-game/)
[^5]: Millington 2009
[^6]: Millington 2009
[^7]: Millington Ian, and John David Funge. “Artificial Intelligence for Games” CRC Press, 2009.
