# The Shortest Path Problem

Pathfinding generally refers to find the shortest route between two end points and has many applications, for example transit planning, maze navigation and robot path planning.[^8]  This is a very vague definition; however, pathfinding is closely related to the shortest path problem, within graph theory, which examines how to identify the path that best meets some criteria (shortest, cheapest, fastest, etc.) between two points in a large network.[^9]

The subject of graph theory had its beginnings in recreational math problems, but it has grown into a significant area of mathematical research, with applications in chemistry, operations research, social sciences, and computer science.[^10]  Graph theory expresses the mathematical theories used to model the properties/applications of graphs and their relationship between objects. Unlike the name might suggest, a graph is a mathematical structure often represented diagrammatically. It has nothing to do with the more common use of the word “graph” to mean any diagram, such as a pie chart or histogram.[^11]  Graphs in this context refer to a set of vertices (also referred to as nodes in computer science) and edges which connect said vertices. There are many types of graphs in graph theory which can be distinguished by their characteristics, for example:
- Simple Graphs – A simple graph is a graph with no self-loops and no parallel edges.
- Multi Graph – A multi graph is a graph with no self-loops but has parallel or multiple edges connected to a pair of nodes. 
- Complete Graph – A complete graph is a graph in which exactly one edge is present between every pair of vertices.
- Connected Graph – A connected graph is a graph in which at least on path exists between every pair of vertices.
- Disconnected Graph – A disconnected graph is a graph in which a path does not exist between at least one pair of vertices.
- Non-Directed Graph – A non-directed graph is a graph in which all the edges in the graph do not contain any direction.
- Directed Graph – A directed graph is a graph in which all edges in the graph follow some direction.

Listed are just a few examples of the different types of graphs which can be applied to solve problems in graph theory.[^12]  Also note that graphs can be weighted if there is a cost to traverse an edge or unweighted if there is no cost associated.

[^8]: Xiao Cui and Hao Shi “A*-based Pathfinding in Modern Computer Games” IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.11 No.1, pp.125 – 130 January 2011
[^9]: Pathfinding [Pathfinding - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pathfinding)
[^10]: Carlson, Stephan C.. "graph theory". Encyclopedia Britannica, 24 Nov. 2020 [graph theory | Problems & Applications | Britannica.](https://www.britannica.com/topic/graph-theory)
[^11]: Millington Ian, and John David Funge. “Artificial Intelligence for Games” CRC Press, 2009.
[^12]: Types of Graphs in Graph Theory [Graph Theory | Gate Vidyalay](https://www.gatevidyalay.com/category/subjects/graph-theory/)

