### Mini-Max Algorithm

The minimax algorithm is another algorithm which also make use of game trees, similar to the MCTS, however, a lot more trivial when comparing its efficiency to simulating large amounts of data. The computer plays a turn-based game by looking at the actions available to it this move and selecting one of them. To select one of the moves, it needs to know what moves are better than others. This knowledge is provided to the computer by the programmer using a heuristic called the static evaluation function. The function used in minmax is a recursive one that returns the maximum pay of scores for the maximizing player, while returning the minimum scores for the minimizing player to minimize their maximum loses. This algorithm is most suitable to solving zero sum games because of these characteristics.

In a turn-based game, the job of the static evaluation function is to look at the current state of the board and score it from the point of view of one player. If the board is a terminal position in the tree, then this score will be the final score for the game.[^22] For games that may run at too large a depth, to stop the search from going on forever, the algorithm has a maximum search depth. If the current board position is at the maximum depth, then it calls the static evaluation function and returns the result

A widely used game to implement the minmax algorithm is Tic-Tac-Toe. This is a perfect example of a two player zero sum game where each player when assuming they both play to win, will either end the game in a win or a draw, a perfect strategy can never lose as the pay offs sum to 0 and cancel each other out.

[^22]: Millington Ian, and John David Funge. “Artificial Intelligence for Games” CRC Press, 2009.
