# Conclusion

To summaries, in this report I have covered several techniques used by game developers to design AI with a focus on implementing behaviours that deal with decision making. The main technique used for general decision making in modern day games is the FSM algorithm because behaviours can be so easily defined. On the other hand, when we are talking in relation to pathfinding, the most optimal algorithm could be seen as the A* algorithm due to its accuracy and completeness especially when using an accurate heuristic. The draw back I find in the A* algorithm is that it’s practically not possible to implement without a goal or heuristic. Which I found out myself while trying to implement an A* implementation for the line racing problem. Also, when comparing tree search algorithms, from my research I would rank the MCTS as the most vigorous with the amount of extensive training required for it to work, and similarly the minimax algorithm acts with the same philosophy of simulating future moves to find the best move, however the minimax algorithm on its own is a lot more limited in the amount of data it can process compared to the MCTS.

I have also presented my own solution to the line racing problem which works without errors and executes each iteration in under half a millisecond. The moves chosen by my agent make the optimal use of space, however, doesn’t seem to be the best strategy when starting further away from the opponent. The moves are somewhat predictable and don’t always yield a win. In the future to improve my results, I would employ the use of alpha beta pruning which ignore suboptimal states when a better state has been found allowing for the algorithm to process less data and make optimal moves sooner. I believe it could also improve the results if the minimax algorithm was used with a state machine algorithm to trigger behaviours such as chasing/avoiding the opponent when making decisions.
